---
title: 'INFO Blog 2: Policies for Creative Works'
date: 2025-11-18
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-10/
tags:
 - case study
 - ethics
 - art
 - creative works
---

[ARTificial: Why Copyright Is Not the Right Policy Tool to Deal with Generative AI](https://yalelawjournal.org/forum/artificial-why-copyright-is-not-the-right-policy-tool-to-deal-with-generative-ai)

The case study explores the philosophical, legal, and practical dimensions of copyright laws in the the use of creative materials for AI training. It argues that extending copyright laws to AI-generated content stifles innovation and fails to protect creators when it comes to issues of compensation, consent, and attribution.

First, Mantegna invites us to to question "philosophical rationales that justify the existence of intellectual property." While they elaborate on this discussion elsewhere, this is an important question that probes the assumptions of the case study: why does and should intellectual property exist? I believe that knowledge production has been largely impossible without stratification. Intellectuals require education, time, and resources (contemporarily, all can be collapsed under "capital") to invent and create, which are available due to their privilege in the socioeconomic structure. Therefore, their products should be appropriated for the benefit of all. I don't mean to imply that structurally disadvantaged people are incapable of innovation, but the desire to receive material or symbolic compensation for perceived merit is individualistic. The question of how to preserve the livelihood of inventors is often discussed, but perhaps we should avoid this question and assert everyone's right to resources, solving the problem of innovations as a lifeline. I am also reminded of how historical Arabic poetry emphasised coauthorship. As an orally transmitted art, poems would be recited by various performers who would substitute words in their reconstruction of the "original," destabilising concepts of creativity or authenticity. 

Speaking of the extent of human intervention required for work to be considered creative is an old debate on aesthetics. Another example, photography, comes to mind. Photography was derided for being mechanistic, easy to do, and infinitely replicable, devaluing the artwork. Proponents of photography maintain that there is much creative expression involved in the medium: the exposure triangle, the composition of the photo, the subject, etc. We can translate these arguments to the case of GAI. We can view the intentional inclusion of certain training data as a creative choice, as well as engineering prompts. These are the only arguments for considering GAI work creative that I can think of, and they are weak ones.

Personally, I am offended that this is a point of conversation. In a world of unprecedented wealth disparity, it is obscene to debate the artistic merit of soulless machines while living, breathing people are starving and homeless, incapable of receiving artistic acknowledgement because of their precarity. I also think that it's unfortunate that machines produce art, a stubbornly human thing, while humans labor endlessly (and needlessly). Art is a sacred human exercise that aestheticises a purposeless world through unrestrained subjectivity; to turn it into a computational process is to beat its very purpose of restoring immediacy. What I mean by immediacy is the unmediated experience of the world and the essences of things, which are obscured by the increasing abstraction of numbers and science. GAI art is not only unethical-because its very existence normalises structural inequality-but hollow and pornographic. 

Beyond art, I think it would be appropriate to implement AI authorship frameworks in cases when AI is used to help with research. This would entail careful documentation for reproducability, and the extent of AI use and whether it was used as a writing device or in the research analysis.

My new discussion question is:

Is AI art inevitable?

This question interested me because it's not like I can dismiss the reality of AI content with a wave of my hand. I would not be surprised to see AI books and movies being produced as informed by real-time data from the market, or even catered to individuals. Good art speaks to humans as transcendental entities, not strictly material but having a soul. Especially great art portrays through style and particularity universal human experiences. Therefore, the logic that reduces people into consumers whose interests (and by extension, themselves) are quantifiable and who purchase increasingly apolitical content is ultimately dehumanising; it atomises individuals while reproducing the ideological mechanism (through political, social, and economic obfuscation) of their inequality.

I think that anyone interested in humanity would immediately recognise the very concept as an insult to our species. Georges Bataille, a French philosopher, argued that to be sovereign (free) means to waste life and energy, not conserve or rationalise them. If we only live life productively to be safe, efficient, and useful, we lose what is most vital. To him, humans are sovereign when they act beyond need, function, or reason. Then, why relegate art to machines when we can spend the time to muse, ponder, and create art ourselves?

I enjoyed Mantegna's discussion of the various algorithmic differences between AI models and the ingenious methods they use. I was not aware of adversarial models and I am interested in training one now. I did not care for the legal jargon but it was helpful to learn.