---
title: 'PRIV Blog 1: Complete Delete'
date: 2025-12-05
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-11/
tags:
 - case study
 - ethics
 - art
 - creative works
---

[Complete Delete: In Practice, Clicking 'Delete' Rarely Deletes. Should it?](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/fesqymtr/release/3?readingCollection=ca73f7c0)


This case study explains why in most cases, clicking "delete" does not completely erase data, exploring the technical, ethical, and policymaking issues that interact to produce this feature of modern data management systems.

I enjoyed reading this case study because it distinguished between user intent and system design choices. Even when a user would like to permanently delete something, they are unwaware of archived versions that linger. Designing systems to either retain data in cases of accidental erasure or hardware failure is important, but the right to privacy and deleting data is equally so.

Therefore, I believe that systems must be transparent about their file management systems. For example, when I delete a photo from my phone, a popup message informs me that it will remain in the "Recently Deleted" folder for 30 days before being permanently deleted. This disclaimer is helpful in knowing my choices and exercising more informed control over my data. Clear, simple explanations at the moment of deleting can familiarise users with the system to avoid the lack of knowledge about file remnance while keeping its flexibility.

Being able to completely delete something is important in preserving people's agency, which is difficult when cloud storage maintains multiple copies of files for error prevention. As the world continues to migrate to cyberspace, residual data, the "hidden" data left behind after a deletion attempt, will increase in volume and scope. This marks a striking shift that can reshape social relations.

For example, social and political scandals, instead of being limited to the unreliable memories of people and circulated orally then through the sluggish print, is now delivered through lightning speed text messages and TikToks. There is no more anonymity, but an unprecedented, permanent exposure of the individual, not simply to their locale but to the globe. At the same time, permanence and diffusion can also help haunt and disgrace criminals or preserve important records. Permanence can also help protect information from software crashes, hardware failures, and user mistakes and help law enforcement.

Deletion, however, gives people agency over their data, reduces data breaches and misuse, and helps people move on from a past they do not want documented. I myself get stressed when I see a picture of a time I would like to forget, or wonder if my SpongeBob fan edits are somewhere on YouTube where they can be used to blackmail me.

Between the control of deletion and the reliability of permanence, users should be foremoest informed, and ideally able to choose between them.

I wasn't aware that infotainment systems in rental cars are not wiped from the previous renter's information. It should be the onus of the rental company to permanently delete the information of users after rental. I personally would assume that after my phone is disconnected, that my information would no longer be accessible. Companies should provide disclaimers to users and wipe data during vehicle check-ins.

When it comes to irrevocably deleting data, it is important for people to retain that right. If law enforcement, or any actor, holds the power to retrieve deleted data, it would be an infringement of personal dignity and privacy. This power can be misused by criminals and the state. Users must gain the literacy to understand how to protect their data from tech companies, the government, and bad faith actors like hackers. I am glad that phones are encrypted to protect people's inner lives.

While I agree with Garfinkel that foreign governments could exploit a feature where law enforcement can access encrypted data, I would also invite him to consider how local government can abuse its powers as well.

Everyday users need to defend their privacy themselves, or buy products that will gaurantee this right. By voting with their dollars, they can retain their freedom. However, this rarely happens. For example, despite the enshittification of the AAA video game industry, a name given to the most technically advanced and presitigious video game studios, consumers continue to buy their games. Indeed, people continue to use almost all of the services they know sells their data to third-party partners.

This case study was quite fun to read as someone interested in media theory. It made me wonder how does the permanence and remnance of digital data compare to other media?

I chose this question because it allows us to compare policies of other forms of data with our current discussion, as well as considering its historical analogs.

For example, the burning of the Library of Alexandria destroyed great knowledge. Physical books decay naturally, and destroying a copy is obvious. Letters are even more rare and easier to destroy because they are unlikely to have copies. By contrast, digital data is endlessly duplicable and increasingly permanent, which complicates deletion and permanence. Perhaps a solution to this problem is using analog media and decreasing our reliance on cloud-based storage.

I enjoyed reading this case study for its discussion of the technical aspects of storage management and its discussion of deletion as a design choice as informed by policy decisions.