---
title: 'Blog 7: Right to Fair Representation'
date: 2025-10-24
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-7/
tags:
 - case study
 - ethics
---

[AI’s Regimes of Representation: A Community-Centered Study of Text-to-Image Models in South Asia](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/bfw5tscj/release/3?readingCollection=65a1a268)

The case study evaluates how text to image models depict South Asian cultures. It argues that these models fail to recognise cultural concepts, are biased towards defaults, and perpetuate cultural tropes, calling for community-based evaluations in addition to standardised evaluations.

Before proceeding, I want to clarify a key term, specificity. It is the ability of a model to represent cultural elements within their conetxt with precision rather than collapsing them into broad, generic, or stereotyped categories. It is about preserving nuance.

Cultural representation is crucial for preserving specificity without collapsing it under broader Eurocentric categories. I also think the impulse to preserve culture can be problematic, as the concept of culture is inherently exclusionary for defining something by its negation; it creates an in-group and out-group binary when human relations have historically been more organic.

In addition, the call to preserve culture can make its pernicious aspects safe from criticism. For example, South Asian caste is a rigid social hierarchy that oppresses people historically called Untouchables, who are relegated to "dirty work" and experience structural violence, ranging from economic disenfranchisement, lynching, rape, and being regarded as polluting the purity of upper caste people, even by touch alone (hence the name).

I think cultural representation should only be important in the context of strategic essentialism, the view that oppressed subjects with no political power or representation must organise for their liberation under an organising principle like culture or identity. This is how Untouchables begun their emancipation, adopting the name Dalit to organise and theorise their liberation from so-called "culture." 

Therfore, attention to power relations is paramount, which can inform us of other historical injustices and biases like Orientalism, which continue to influence how non-Western cultures are represented.

Orientalism is a critical concept, developed by Edward Said, that describes the Western world’s historically biased, stereotypical, and often simplistic depiction of the Eastern world (the "Orient"). It is not simply prejudice, but a powerful Western discourse that is fundamentally tied to imperialism and colonialism. By portraying the East as exotic, irrational, static, and inferior. Orientalist discourse flattened differences within the so-called "East" under umbrella terms like Arabs, Moors, Orientals, romanticised them as mystical, sexually permissive, animalised them as closer to nature, passionate, irrational. This project sought to contrast them what the West thought itself to be: rational and civilised. Orientalism justified Western domination and helped the West define itself by the opposite values. 

Currently, the West continues its extractive imperialism under the guise of free market liberalisation, the war on terror, and through token international law. When current models or media display an Orientalist bias, they risk perpetuating these historically oppressive modes of thought.

I would evaluate model outputs by examining whether they recognise that identity and culture are socially constructed and fluid. Defining identities freezes them in time. This turns living, changing cultures into static objects. Furthermore, identity is itself a form of exclusion as it creates a binary between what is something and what something is not. Models should therefore be assessed for whether they preserve nuance instead of reinforcing rigid boundaries between “self” and “other.” 

I would also evaluate if the specificity of concepts is preserved and accurately translated. While benchmarks can give an aggregate indicator of progress, they fail to elaborate on the extent of cultural harm. Lived experience like the erasure of Bangla scripts carry harm that is missed by benchmarks.

AI can be more globally inclusive provided that engineers dialogue with communities and include more texts from marginalised voices. I also think that local engineers should also participate in creating these models, increasing the cultural sensitivity of AI while also decentralising the tech economy.

Developers need to engage with the corpus of the communities they wish to include, which encompasses their grand narratives and cultural criticism to govern their project. They must also collect more robust data from sub-regions and locales in an effort to disaggregate, and add qualitiative harm checks.

Encoding freezes in time the organic process of culture, so regular updates probably through direct engagement with the cultural production of the community can keep the dataset relevant while archiving its developments. It must also be aware of the level of aggregation it operates at. Cultures are heterogeneous, and awareness of subregions is important. Perhaps the addition of metadata like city, neighborhood, or perhaps even coordinates can somewhat help in avoiding aggregating lived experience into a larger concept.

Due to its indexical quality, film and photography have a strong democratic potential, but the act of seeing is socially constructed (a study explored photographers on a farm; males photographed buildings and tools while women photographed animals and children) and as seen in this case study, the data on which models are built can be biased. Therefore we should audit the data we feed our models.

My discussion question is, who should be responsible to correct cultural misrepresentations?

This is an interesting question because although I advocate for direct contact with communities, or perhaps disregarding this voyueristic desire to study and assimilate their cultures, contact is often difficult especially across spatial displacement, power relations, borders, and linguistic barriers. This means that diasporas and elites, who are more likely to be accessible could hold the position to criticise cultural misuse, but who is to evaluate theirs? It's an important question because it relates to the cultural imperialism of the majority and the upwardly mobile. Sociology distinguishes between the subaltern and the native informant. The former is a marginalised member of the colonised country who has no power, representation, or wealth—think of women in sweatshops in Bangladesh. The latter, also known as the Westernised intellectual, could also be oppressed but is not considered subaltern beause they have access to symbolic capital i.e. language, philosophy, values of the colonial power and therefore are not completely alienated by the socioeconomic structure. The tension is that the subaltern, because of their position in the system, is silenced and must be spoken and advocated for even at the cost of distorting their actual voices. However, because of their Western education, the intellectual could risk misrepresenting the subaltern or writing meaningless critiques of the colonial power and reinforcing their position in the system, even if well-intentioned. This discussion is why my questions do not have a straightforward answer.

I liked this exercise because it is directly at the intersection of my fields of study: computation and social science. It's interseting to know how the technical aspect of AI works and the interpretive and diffuse nature of culture.