---
title: 'INFO Blog 1: Social Media and Moderation'
date: 2025-11-10
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-9/
tags:
 - case study
 - ethics
 - censorship
---

[Case study](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/lkf63cu5/release/1)

Censorship can be seen as a necessary solution to eliminate hate speech and misinformation, which can have serious consequences especially to marginalised groups---think of the stereotypes or outright fabrications mobilised against low-income neighborhoods, or the Nigerian Prince scams targetting the elderly. Mills argues that censorship is unlikely to be effective and transgresses democratic norms, locating the problem with public mistrust.

Institutions, like universities, licensed professionals, and specialised government agencies act as epistemic authorities that produce and disseminate knowledge. I would also consider secondary education under this umbrella. Schools use indicators to measure student learning, the degree to which a student imbibes the prescribed curriculum. Schools are an interested institution to producing a disciplined, healthy, and educated population to undertake the the increasingly specialised labor of maintaining the state and living a good life. For example, singing the Pledge of Allegiance and opposing critical race theory serve to construct a nationlist imaginary in students, while physical education hopes to maintain their bodies. If education is instrumental, then we need to be careful to consider the degree to which it is credible. Schools in the US face censorship, regressive policymaking, and underfunding, which pose threats to the credibility and quality of the information that they disseminate.

I don't think censorship is justified unless there is direct harm invovled, like incitement to violence or doxxing. Otherwise, I believe that people should evaluate knowledge on their own terms. Censorship is deeply connected to power and can be easily used to weaponise and flatten difference. Truly democratic dissent should be invigorated by the exchange of ideas. The hope is that in a true democracy, people will be able to distinguish dubious and problematic claims from informed knowledge.

I think that digital technology has revolutionised information flow. There are obvious negative effects like overstimulation, algorithmic bias of platforms facilitating such flows, and unequal access. There are many positives as well: challenging propaganda in real time, bridging foreign lands, easing discourse analysis of social groups, and speeding up the research process through dedicated tools and databases. These technologies not only make it faster and easier to learn, but to produce knowledge as well.

It has become a second habit of mine to check the certification of websites to confirm their trustworthiness. When I am seeking information, I tend to prioritise nonprofit organisations, government agencies, but first and foremost, academia. However, as previously discussed, these types of institutions can still hold epistemic biases and spread misinformation (e.g. a disproven study sturcturing a branch of subsequent research), disinformation (phrenology, IQ testing, and now SAT scores), and malinformation (manufacturing consent for foreign wars). 

New discussion question:
Does labelling disputed content polarise people futher?

This question interests me because it touches upon the theme of trust in this context. There is a lot of decision making involved: determining what should count as disputed and why, and juxtapose it to the "truth." I do think that offering users this label with cited context will allow them to evaluate the contested claims themselves. Of course, this should already be the responsibility of users.

I really enjoyed reading this case study because it focused on how epistemology shapes and is shaped by society. I enjoyed its discussion of the various institutions and the different focuses they had in knowledge production. I particularly enjoyed the discussion on high modernism and the tension with religion.