---
title: 'Blog 5: Data & Society Databites Talk'
date: 2025-10-07
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-5/
tags:
 - case study
 - ethics
 - society
---

State power and data

**Databites Talk**  
[Conversations on the Datafied State Part Three: Race, Surveillance, Resistance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15W25Ijs9Rc&list=PLYrf5LyVCF1MnfaMLYRL-qvkZNt2oJukC&index=3)

In increasingly computational modes of governance, safety and surveillance have become intertwined. The talk invites its audience to ponder the ways in which technology-driven politics exacerbate inequalities. It begins by grounding the discussion of technological ethics by acknowledging Black victims of gun violence.

The talk features Tamara K. Nopper, a sociologist and data scientist specialising in the social impact of technology, with a particular emphasis on alternative data and credit scoring. Chaz Arnett is a lawyer researching state-sponsored racialised surveillance. Raúl Carrillo researches surveillance and discipline in the cryptocurrency sector. Alyx Goodwin is an organiser working with the relationship of the finance industry, policing, and tech.

The datafied state refers to the process of adopting data and algorithms for state purposes. While this digitalisation makes governance more efficient, it can embed bias. The research initiative interrogates the anthropological consequences of this transformation. This is an important critical project as technology is often presented as neutral and benevolent. The speakers remind us of how power informs whose data is collected, and how it is interpetted and used.

Alexandra Goodwin provides an illustrative example. ShotSpotter, a surveillance system, is marketed as a gun violence prevention tool. However, its false positives disproportionately flag racialised neighborhoods, increasing harm rather than reducing it, while capitalising on notions of safety. According to this [source](https://www.stopspying.org/shotspotter), ShotSpotter's outputs further prove that it is not viable for its purpose. Goowdin's stated agenda is to abolish the police, which she views as the muscle of racialised capitalism, tying her criticism of the technology to a broader system of oppression, historicising and politicising ethics. Chaz Arnett is not fatalistic about the misuse of technology, arguing that it can be a tool of empowerment if reclaimed by the collective, which already intuitively understands technology without its jargon.

This was an interesting talk because it destabilises the mythical role of technology in contemporary politics. We need to be all the more cautious about its misuse.

My question is, to what degree can data be used in abolition work?

I'm interested because I am contemplating an advanced degree in computational social science, but I am weary of this route's positivism. Then, can data be used to advance class struggle as we work towards abolition, or should we "shelf" it for post-capital governance?

While data can be used to expose inequality and identify solutions, without the appropriate praxis, it can become purely descriptive. Empiricism promises objectivity. Applied to humans, it strips them of their individuality and strips away illusion, turning them into data points. Rationality, which promises to liberate humanity, then becomes a tool of domination. In this sense, the very logic of knowing under capitalism is inseparable from control. This is why social science has made a turn towards subjectivity and the individual in their work. It is still important to know that 40 million people are facing food insecurity due to the government shutdown, which we can only know through quantitative analysis, but it is equally important to recognise that their very reliance on government assistance is a failure of the system as large (or its working as intended).

The conversation was important for its justice-driven, opinionated, and sociohistorical understanding of systems of domination and their technologies. This is especially important as the USA's technological oligarchy continues to shape its direction.